Devices produced data
in the form of events.
As a refresher, events are observable
occurrences that happen on a network
system or device.
This data provides visibility
into an environment.
Logs are one of the key ways security
professionals detect unusual or
malicious activity.
A log is a record of events that
occur within an organization's systems.
System activity is recorded in
what's known as a log file or
commonly called logs.
Almost every device or
system can generate logs.
Logs contain multiple entries which detail
information about a specific event or
occurrence.
Logs are useful to security analysts
during incident investigation since
they record details of what, where, and
when an event occurred on the network.
This includes details like date, time,
location, the action made, and
the names of the users or
systems who performed the action.
These details offer valuable insight,
not only for
troubleshooting issues related
to system performance,
but most importantly, for
security monitoring.
Logs allow analysts to build a story and
timeline around various event occurrences
to understand what exactly happened.
This is done through log analysis.
Log analysis is the process of examining
logs to identify events of interest.
Since there are different
sources available to get logs,
an enormous volume of log
data can be generated.
It's helpful to be selective in what
we log, so that we can log efficiently.
For example, web applications generate
a high volume of log messages, but
not all of this data may be
relevant to an investigation.
In fact, it may even slow things down.
Excluding specific data from being logged
helps reduce the time spent
searching through log data.
You may recall our discussion
on SIEM technology.
SIEM tools provide security professionals
with a high-level overview
of what happens in a network.
SIEM tools do this by first collecting
data from multiple data sources.
Then, the data gets aggregated or
centralized in one place.
Finally, the diverse log
formats get normalized or
converted into a single preferred format.
SIEM tools help process large log volumes
from multiple data sources in real-time.
This allows security analysts to
quickly search for log data and
perform log analysis to
support their investigations.
So how do logs get collected?
Software known as log forwarders
collect logs from various sources and
automatically forward them to
a centralized log repository for storage.
Since different types of devices and
systems can create logs,
there are different log data
sources in an environment.
These include network logs, which
are generated by devices such as proxies,
routers, switches, and firewalls, and
system logs, which are generated
by operating systems.
There's also application logs, which
are logs related to software applications,
security logs, which are generated
by security tools like IDS or IPS,
and lastly authentication logs,
which record login attempts.
Here's an example of
a network log from a router.
There are a couple of log entries here, but
we'll focus on the first line.
Here, we can observe a number of fields.
First, there's an action specifying
ALLOW. This means that the router's
firewall settings allowed access from
a specific IP address to google.com.
Next, there's a field specifying
the source, which lists an IP address.
So far, the information from this log entry
is telling us that network traffic to
google.com from this source
IP address is allowed.
The last field specifies the timestamp,
which is one of the most
essential fields in a log.
We can identify the exact date and
time of an action that's occurred.
This is useful for
correlating multiple events to develop
a timeline of the incident.
There you have it! You've analyzed your
first network log. Coming up,
we'll continue our discussion on logs and
explore log formats.